## dust sensor Plantower PMS5003 and PMS7003
### Status
In alpha since 20th of July 2017

### Description
The dust sensor counts particles 0.3,0.5, 1.0, 2.5, 5.0, and 10 um (mu) per 0.1 liter (dm3),  and outputs ug/m3 for PM1, PM2.5 and PM10.

The Plantower dust sensor is simp0le to connect via a TTL USB. The serial output is 9600 baud (1 stop bit), and outputs are binary data telegrams (32 bits/ 16 bit data integers).

One can operate in working mode and put the module to sleep e.g. via 3V3 (use it with 10K resister) *set* pin.
The sensor has a build in fan (5 VCC). On power on the sensor will be in active state (fan ON). There is a reset pin (3V3 high with 10K resistor).

The PMS7003 is a late, smaller, and uses less power as the PMS5003. The manual pages do not differ much. The test has been done with a PMS7003.

It is hard to find an english version of the specifications and programming interface.

Cost price is about € 25 (Ali Exress).

### References
* http://www.rigacci.org/wiki/doku.php/doc/appunti/hardware/raspberrypi_air Plantower PMS5003 application with Pi
* http://www.aqmd.gov/docs/default-source/aq-spec/resources-page/plantower-pms5003-manual_v2-3.pdf?sfvrsn=2 english version of specification of PMS7003 from Plantower

### Hardware
Use the 8 wire connector provided with the sensor. The connection is as follows:
```
PMS7003
    sensor module  10 pin connector    USB TTL eg Prolific PL2303TA
|----------------|
||----|          | (pin 8) N/C red ------   not used
||1  2|          | (pin 7) N/C black ----   not used
||.  .|          | (pin 6) reset yellow - left unused (10K Ohm -> 3V3 pin?)
||9 10|          | (pin 5) Tx  green ----xxx-- white Rx -----------\
||----|          | (pin 4) Rx  blew -----xxx-- green Tx -----------\
|                | (pin 3) set white ---- left unused (3V3 pin?)    |-> USB
|                | (pin 2) Gnd orange ---xxx-- black Gnd-----------/
|                | (pin 1) 5V  purple ---xxx-- red   5V -----------/
|----------------|
```
Or connect Tx(green),Rx(blew),Gnd(orange),5V(purple) to respectively Rx(yellow),Tx(white),5V(red), Gnd(black) standard connector of GrovePi+ serial (/dev/ttyAMA0 and make sure it is not used by Jessie; see how to of Grove GPS for details).
### Dependences
The module depends on serial and struct standard Python library module.

### Usage
The module MyPMS7003.py will drive the Plantower PMS5003 or PMS7003 sensor. Test it first as standalone python script. Use the Conf settings to increase the debug level and turn in first instrance the multithreading off (`Conf["sync"] = True`).

The sensor will measure particles in ug/m3. Change the option units (`Conf["units"]`) from ug/m3 to pcs/qf. As well the senor will do counts per 0.1 liter. The software will convert it to pcs/0.01qf unless the `Conf["units"]` will be set to pcs/0.1dm3.

By default only PM1, PM2.5 and PM10 (calibration set to [0,1]) will be in the output. Define `fields option (Conf["fields"]) as e.g. pm03_cnt, pm25_cnt, etc for particle count values, or pm1_atm, pm25_atm, pm10_atm (defualt in ug/m3) for concentration in generic atmospheric conditions values.
Not sure about the atmospheric condition definition: temp/humidity corrections?

The configuration `interval` will define the measurement (an average of the sampled data) value per period of *interval* seconds (default 120 seconds).
Every second in a *sample* (seconds, default 60 seconds) period from the sensor module the values will be read.
The configuration `sample` defines the the *sample* period. Other values sent by the sensor are discarded.

### To Do
Either via the *set* pin or via the command interface to the sensor the fan and so readings can be put to sleep mode. From sleep mode to active mode one has to discard readings for 30 seconds. Limiting the fan powered on will increase the module life time.

From the manual:
* CMD `0x42 0x4d 0xe1 X 00H checksum` put sensor in passive mode.
* CMD `0x42 0x4d 0xe4 X 00H checksum` standby mode (fan OFF?).
* CMD `0x42 0x4d 0xe4 X 01H checksum` normal mode (fan ON?), and wait 30 seconds.
* CMD `0x42 0x4d 0xe2 X X   checksum` read 32 bytes
* CMD `0x42 0x4d 0xe4 X 00H checksum` standby mode (fan OFF?).
*
* CMD `0x42 0x4d 0xe1 X 01H checksum` put sensor in active mode.
